# DeepVariant_Optimizer
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF MACHINE LEARNING METHODS FOR VARIANT CALLING DATA CLEANING
## Abstract
The rapid progress in genetic technologies over the past few decades has led to the emergence of a new research field - personal genomics or consumer genetics concerned with human genotyping. The genotyping process involves the sequencing, analysis and interpretation of an individual's genome to determine genetic traits, ancestry and disease risks. Variant calling is a crucial step in this process, in which the genomic variations are identified and recorded in a Variant Call Format (VCF) file. However, the stochastic nature of the DNA sequencing procedure leads to the presence of technical noise in VCF files, affecting data quality. This project aims to develop a machine learning (ML) system for noise reduction in variant calling data without omitting difficult genome regions. The study will focus on data features engineering and ML architectures comparison, as well as wrapping the best model in a console application. The ML methods to be compared are Decision trees, Random Forests, Gradient Boosting Machines, Neural Networks, and others. The proposed ML system will be an easy-to-implement post-processing tool for variant calling data quality improvement, benefiting both the commercial and research sectors of personal genomics. The study does not aim to alter widely used variant calling tools, but suggests a post-processing procedure of their outputs. The project will not cover the wet lab part of genome sequencing due to financial limitations. The results of the study have the potential to provide in-sights into the data noise origins, allowing researchers to reduce it at the early stages of the genotyping process.

** Keywords **: genetic variant calling, data cleaning, machine learning, neural networks.
